How Generous You Already Are Predicts
Whether Fairness Gives or Takes

Dheirav
Responsible AI
Algorithmic Bias Mitigation
dheirav2005@gmail.com

Abstract—A group-fairness constraint requires two groups’
selection rates to be close, but it does not say how the gap
should close, and the certifying metric is content with either
answer: it reads 0.018 where a demographic-parity constraint
destroyed a fifth of the favourable decisions and 0.010 where
it created more than it destroyed. A team cannot tell from its
own dashboard which it has just done. We show the direction
is set by the population rather than by which in-processing
method is chosen, and is predictable before deployment from
the rate at which the current model says yes, read against that
population’s own crossover — the rate a team already has,
the crossover it must measure. Across 179 disjoint population
samples spanning six decision domains, eight data sources and
five countries, the constraint withdraws below a population’s
crossover and extends above it: on UCI Adult five in-processing
methods each shrink the pool by 7.9–22.1%, while on mortgage
lending the identical constraint grows it. Committed before ten
never-measured populations, the rule scored 9 of 10 against a
best constant of 6.
The claim is narrow and sealed tests made it so. Direction is
predictable within a population; magnitude is not, and below one
percentage point the direction call is a coin flip. The practical
output is an audit that locates a team’s own crossover and refuses
when it cannot: on fifty populations drawn at random, frame
and seed fixed in advance, 78% admit a directional rule and
22% do not. That is the monotonicity gate alone; run end to
end with every gate applied, the audit returns a direction on
63 of 104 stored sweeps — a little over six times in ten — and
hands back the rest as unanswerable rather than scoring them.
Two scope limits belong here: the relationship disappears under
post-processing, and in five of the eight sources the favourable
decisions are predicted labels rather than allocations actually
made. Of twelve sealed or registered direction tests, one passed;
we report the failures because each removed a stronger claim
than the one that survives.
Index Terms—algorithmic fairness, levelling down, demo-
graphic parity, in-processing, selection rate, disparate impact

I. INTRODUCTION

That a fairness constraint is silent about how the gap closes
is well established. Mittelstadt et al. [11] made levelling down
the centre of a well-known critique; Maheshwari et al. [13] ob-
serve that it “often goes unnoticed in the overall performance
of the model”; Krco et al. [12] built an auditing framework
precisely because an aggregate score reports neither how many
people were affected nor in which direction; and Hu and Chen
[6] show, on the dataset this paper opens with, that a parity-
proxy constraint can leave both groups with fewer favourable
classifications at once. We take all of that as given.

What the literature leaves open is the question a deploying
team actually faces: when does each direction happen? The
question is not academic, because the certifying number is
not merely silent about the answer — it is equally content
with either. On UCI Adult a demographic-parity constraint
destroyed roughly a fifth of the favourable decisions, and the
parity difference it was certified against read 0.018. On HMDA
mortgage data the identical constraint created more favourable
decisions than it destroyed, and the parity difference read
0.010. Both pass. A team looking only at its fairness dashboard
cannot tell which of the two it has just done.
The claim, in one sentence. Whether a parity constraint
hands out more favourable decisions or takes them away is set
by the population being decided about rather than by which
in-processing method is chosen — and a team can find out
which, before deploying, by locating its own crossover and
reading its current selection rate against it.
Two words in that sentence are doing work and we would
rather name them than have them found. In-processing: under
post-processing the relationship is absent, so the direction is
not a population property in general, only within the family of
methods studied here. Locating: the selection rate is a number
every deploying organisation already has, and the crossover is
not — it costs a sweep. The only version of this claim testable
from a dashboard alone is a transported prior, whose record is
9 of 10 and then 5 of 10, and which we demote accordingly.
The audit that follows from it has three outcomes rather than
two — the constraint will give, it will take, or the population
admits no answer and the audit says so (Algorithm 1). The
third is not a caveat attached to the method; it is a third of
what the method does.
Four conditions bound the sentence above. Each is measured
rather than assumed, and each was bought with a test that
failed:

• Direction only, and only above a floor. A sealed model
of magnitude lost to predicting zero (MAE 4.50 against
0.77). Effects below one percentage point are called
correctly 61% of the time — a coin flip — against 95%
above it.

• About four populations in five. On fifty populations
drawn at random, frame and seed fixed before any arm
ran, 78% admit a directional rule and 22% do not. The
procedure refuses the 22% rather than guessing at them.


• In-processing,
not
post-processing.
Under
group-
threshold post-processing [5] the relationship is absent
(r = −0.024), and a sealed deconfounding test locates
that boundary at the optimizer family rather than at access
to the protected attribute (Section VII).

• Mostly predicted labels, not allocations. In five of the
eight data sources the favourable decisions are model
predictions rather than decisions actually made. HMDA,
the one source recording real approvals, supports the
direction claim on its natural arms but is also where our
sweep protocol failed its held-out test.
The rule underneath is not surprising once stated: say yes
often and the constraint tends to give, say yes rarely and
it tends to take. What is not available without measuring is
where the boundary falls for a particular population. Located
crossovers span 0.22 to 0.81. In the one setting where we drew
populations at random rather than choosing them — US state-
level income prediction, fifty draws — no population’s oper-
ating rate reached 0.55, and 25 of the 47 with a computable
rate sat inside the 0.28–0.65 interval where most of them fall,
which is precisely where an unaided reading of “often” against
“rarely” has nothing to say. A further fifth of them follow no
directional rule at all; there the intuition still returns a confident
answer, and the audit declines to.

A. Scope, stated first

This is a paper about attribute-blind in-processing con-
straints, meaning the regime in which the protected attribute is
unavailable at decision time. This is the regime most deployed
systems occupy: in the United States, per-group decision
thresholds face direct disparate-treatment exposure (Ricci v.
DeStefano [27]; in credit, ECOA and Regulation B prohibit
attribute-based terms outright), and commentators read the
doctrine the same way [19], [26]. Two honest qualifications.
First, the barrier is jurisdiction-specific, and the two major
jurisdictions draw it in different places: in the US even
training-time use of the attribute — which every in-processing
method here involves — is legally unsettled, while in the EU
the split runs the other way: decision-time use of special-
category data faces GDPR Article 9 and direct-discrimination
doctrine, but training-time use for bias detection and correction
in high-risk systems is expressly permitted, under safeguards,
by Article 10(5) of the AI Act — and for race and ethnicity
the blind regime is often simply factual, because most member
states collect no such attribute at all. Second, because of that
split we motivate the regime as the one systems occupy, not as
one any law cleanly compels. Under post-processing the effect
we report disappears, and a sealed deconfounding test shows
the disappearance belongs to the method, not to the attribute:
the same in-processing optimizer, given the attribute, preserves
the relationship (Section VII). The blind regime remains the
paper’s scope because it is where the record was built and
where deployed systems sit — not because blindness is what
the finding depends on.

B. Contributions

The phenomenon. An attribute-blind parity constraint with-
draws favourable decisions on some populations and extends
them on others, and the certifying metric reports the same
kind of number in both cases: on UCI Adult five in-processing
methods each shrink the pool by 7.9–22.1% at an exchange
rate of 2.68 destroyed per created, while on HMDA mortgage
lending the identical constraint grows it by 4.3% at 0.50.
Measured over 179 disjoint population samples, six domains,
eight sources, five countries. Counted in people rather than
rates the burden is more lopsided still, and that divergence is
itself predictable (r = +0.885).
The audit, and its refusal. The same design lets a practi-
tioner locate their own crossover from a deployed model, and
return NO ANSWER when the population supports none. On
fifty populations drawn at random — frame, seed and draw
committed before any arm ran — 78% admit a directional
rule and 22% do not, and the procedure hands back the latter
rather than scoring them. Detecting a non-monotone landscape
requires the sweep that transporting a prior exists to avoid,
which is why the refusal cannot be replaced by a dashboard
reading.
The predictor, identified by elimination rather than
asserted. Holding the task fixed and moving only the decision
rule separates the rate from task difficulty. A screen-gated
Brazilian race cohort — ten arms from two person-samples, so
the confound breaks within populations, though leaving either
out drops the rule to 60% — beat a cutoff-only null 8–9 to
5; a sealed lending cohort beat a loan-purpose null 8 to 5 on
real approvals; a five-domain comparison rules out the group
gap. We say predicts, never causes: no pooled slope transfers.
A conditionality theory predicts, now measured. Con-
temporaneous theory [14] establishes distribution-dependence
in the blind regime without experiments, its conditions being
orderings on score regions rather than measurable quantities.
A percentile-relaxed form of that ordering agrees with the
measured direction on 24 of 26 arms and tracks our predictor
at r = +0.935, holding across 150 arms at r = +0.850
(population-clustered 95% interval +0.813 to +0.892) and
surviving a boosted-tree probe. The exact conditions were
certified on none of the 26 by our plug-in estimator, whose
ratio diverges in the ˆν tail — an estimator pathology, and we
tried no other.
Two predictive claims, and a prior demoted. A sweep-
conditional claim — measure your own crossover, then read
your rate against it — and a weaker transported-prior claim,
the only one testable before any measurement. The rule itself
is sealed: committed before ten never-measured populations,
it scored 9 of 10 against a best constant of 6. The fixed value
0.54 fares worse and we no longer present it as a finding:
located crossovers span 0.22 to 0.81, the value failed its own
strict bar on the race cohort, and on a second post-hoc cohort
it scored 5 of 10 — each miss agreeing with that population’s
own sweep.
Boundaries stated rather than left for review to find,


including a computable test for when the procedure cannot
be used at all. Of twelve sealed or registered direction tests,
one passed; each failure removed a stronger claim than the
one that survives, and one cohort built to strengthen the paired
statistic showed the attempt self-defeating by construction. The
relationship survives changes of route, tolerance, base learner
and protected attribute, and disappears under post-processing.

II. RELATED WORK

What we take as given. Levelling down as a phenomenon
and minimum-rate constraints as a remedy are Mittelstadt et
al.’s [11]; the impact decomposition we use throughout is Krco
et al.’s [12]; fairness gerrymandering is Kearns et al.’s [15],
which we replicate with a boundary attached (Section VI); the
income-cutoff knob is Ding et al.’s [16]; the reductions we
constrain with are [1], and we benchmark against minimax
group fairness [20] rather than only against the unconstrained
reduction. Contemporaneous theory [14] establishes that in the
blind regime the direction is distribution-dependent, so we
do not claim the conditionality itself — what it contains is
no experiments and conditions stated as orderings on score
regions rather than measurable quantities.
Four adjacent results, and what each leaves open. Hu and
Chen [6] come closest to the phenomenon: an in-processing
parity-proxy constraint on this paper’s own dataset leaving
both groups with fewer favourable classifications, read as a
Pareto violation. Their existence claim is prior to ours and we
do not repeat it as new; what they do not do is parameterise
the effect, and their conclusion — that welfare moves non-
monotonically in the fairness tolerance within one population
— concerns a different axis from ours, which compares
unconstrained against constrained across populations. Liu et
al. [7] is the closest structural analogue: a critical selection
rate at which the sign of a parity constraint’s effect flips, with
the baseline’s position relative to it doing the predicting. Three
things differ and the resemblance is worth stating plainly rather
than leaving for a reader to find — their flipping quantity is
one group’s expected score change over a time step against our
one-shot headcount over both groups, their axis is the protected
group’s own rate against our model’s overall rate, and their
policies are group-specific where ours are blind. Menon and
Williamson [8] give the parity-optimal blind classifier as a
per-instance threshold correction, pushing some subjects out
of the positive set and pulling others in without evaluating the
net. The infra-marginal line [9], [19] supplies the vocabulary
a mechanism would need — what happens at the margin, not
away from it — and a direction flip of its own, though theirs
is one group’s share of a fixed budget rather than a pool that
can change size.
On not explaining the mechanism. Our sealed derivation
lost to a constant (Section X) and we claim no mechanism, but
we should not overstate that into an absence of any account.
For the attribute-aware Bayes-optimal case the parity-optimal
thresholds are available in closed form [10] as opposite-signed
shifts each inversely proportional to a group’s size; to first
order the group sizes cancel and the sign of the pool change is

set by which group carries more score density at the decision
margin — an infra-marginality statement, and a property of
the population rather than of the method, which is what we
measure. We could not extend it: our constraint is blind, our
classifier is a reduction’s randomized mixture rather than a
threshold rule, and the effects we measure are far outside a
first-order regime. The honest statement is that we failed to
extend a known marginal argument to the blind randomized
case, not that no account exists.

III. SETUP AND METHOD

Data. 179 independent populations across eight sources.
Two are US surveys: UCI Adult (45,222 rows) and ACS
Income [16] over 102 state-years and two protected attributes.
One records real allocations: HMDA 2018 mortgage filings,
66 rate-bearing arms over 40 states. The rest are IPUMS
International census extracts for Brazil and Mexico, COMPAS
[18], LSAC bar passage, the Dutch national census of 2001,
and Taiwanese credit-card default records. The last three were
added to leave the sources the finding was formed in, and
chosen for what they test: the Dutch census carries a between-
group gap of 0.298, roughly twice Adult’s, which makes
it the hardest case for the standard “it is really the group
gap” alternative; LSAC was chosen because bar passage is
naturally generous (base rate 0.890) and should therefore be
unsweepable.
What a favourable decision is, and mostly is not. This
belongs here because it bounds everything after it. In five of
the eight sources no one receives anything: the favourable
decisions are a classifier’s labels over people whose incomes,
occupations or bar results already exist, so the pool being
given and taken is a pool of predictions. HMDA is the one
source recording real allocative decisions — and it is where
the direction reverses, and where our sweep protocol failed
its held-out test. Whether the construct transports from status-
prediction benchmarks to allocation data is an open question,
not an assumption we are entitled to. On HMDA the outcome
is the lender’s approval: action-taken codes 1 and 2 against
3, with withdrawn, incomplete, purchased and preapproval
records excluded as not being a completed approve-or-deny,
and features allow-listed to what exists when the application
is filed.
Definitions. An arm is one population under one configu-
ration — a decision threshold, a label cutoff, a tolerance, a
learner. The selection rate r is the fraction of the test split
the baseline marks favourable. The pool change ∆pool is
the percentage change, baseline to mitigated, in the number
of favourable decisions; extension and withdrawal name its
sign. A population’s crossover is the rate at which that sign
changes, reported as the bracket between the highest rate that
still shrinks the pool and the lowest that grows it. The viable
band is the span of rates over which the baseline stays above
the trivial predictor. The exchange rate is favourable decisions
destroyed per favourable decision created, an unweighted
descriptive count.


Protocol and convention. An L2-regularised logistic re-
gression on a 70/30 split, five seeds per arm, with every
reported figure a seed mean; the constraint is Fairlearn’s
exponentiated-gradient reduction under demographic parity
[1] at a tolerance of 0.01 unless stated. y = 1 is always
the favourable outcome. That required inverting COMPAS’s
recorded target, which encodes recidivism, and declaring Fe-
male the advantaged group on its sex arm, since women in
that cohort reoffend less. Both are enforced by automated
checks, because either error produces every directional result
sign-inverted without raising.
Exclusion rules, and where they bite. An arm is discarded
if the baseline parity gap is below 0.05, or if the baseline
accuracy falls below max(p, 1 − p), the accuracy of always
predicting the more common label. Both were developed
during the exploratory phase in response to failures the ledger
records, so exploratory correlations are conditioned on in-
sample-tuned filters and Table VIII reports the dependence.
What the sealed tests did with them varies, and stating it as
uniform would flatter them: the re-seal applies neither and
scores all ten populations raw; the third-direction and lending
cohorts apply only the magnitude guard their own protocols
fix; the screen-gated race cohort is the one carrying both,
frozen before its extract existed. The sealed record is therefore
less filtered than an unqualified claim of frozen guards would
suggest, which is the direction that favours it.
Three survey conventions, because every crossover here
depends on them. Inherited from the folktables benchmark
[16]: ACS records are used unweighted, incomes are nominal
without the inflation adjustment, and household clustering is
not modelled. Every selection rate is therefore a property
of the unweighted sample rather than a design-consistent
state estimate, and the numeric locations — including the
0.54 prior this paper argues about — are properties of that
convention. The weighted re-analysis has run: under person
weights every located crossover shifts down by 0.03–0.08,
without changing any population’s ordering or any direction
call. That shift is the same order as the 0.54-against-0.50
distinction of Section IX-C, which is a reason to read the
ordering as the finding and the value as a convention-relative
landmark. Seed-resampled intervals are anti-conservative for
the same reason.
Accounting. A population is one unit — a state, cohort or
census — and independent means disjoint person samples: no
person appears in two, and arms within a population share
people, so however many arms a population contributes it is
counted once. Ratios here are over populations unless they
say otherwise. Table III states which populations enter which
analysis; the per-ratio denominators are computed from the
stored results rather than maintained by hand, since four counts
in this project’s own history turned out to be arm counts
masquerading as population counts.

TABLE I
WHICH POPULATIONS ENTER WHICH ANALYSIS, FOR THE ANALYSES THIS
PAPER REPORTS. THE COMPLETE RECORD CARRIES FURTHER ROWS FOR
RESULTS THAT ARE CITED HERE BUT PRESENTED THERE.

is one population under one configuration; populations are counted once
however many arms they contribute.
Analysis
Populations (arms)

Ablation; who pays
Adult (5 methods × 5 seeds)
Rate–people divergence
10 pops. (19 arms, 2 attributes)
Label route (income cutoffs)
AL sex; AL, MS, OR, UT race (4 each)
Natural transition
HMDA MS+LA (5 loan purposes)
Threshold route, dense sweeps Dutch, SC, COMPAS, AL, KY (12 pts.)
Tolerance, 25× range
AL, CT, KY, OR, SC
Boosted trees
the same five states
Post-processing regime
17 populations (r = −0.024)
Attribute-aware direction
27 of 27, of which 9 pre-registered
Relaxed ζ ordering
26 arms from 15 populations
Crossover intervals
4 non-lending + 3 lending estimates
Sealed test 1 (failed)
8 scored + Taiwan, all fresh
Re-seal (holds)
10 fresh ACS states
Sealed magnitude (failed)
NY + TX (16 arms)
Selection-rate floor
10 pops. (19 arms)
Third direction cohort (failed)
24 fresh state-years, 2014 + 2019
Sealed lending cohort (failed)
8 fresh markets (16 arms, 2 purposes each)
Lending coverage
40 race + 26 sex arms (66)
Landscape survey
50 pops. at random (660 arms)

TABLE II
FIVE IN-PROCESSING METHODS ON UCI ADULT, FIVE SEEDS: THE TWO
REDUCTIONS AND GRIDSEARCH FROM [1], ADVERSARIAL DEBIASING
AFTER [2], AND THE PREJUDICE REMOVER AFTER [3]; DI IS THE
DISPARATE-IMPACT RATIO OF [4]. EVERY ONE REACHES PARITY, AND
EVERY ONE SHRINKS THE POOL.

Method
Acc.
DP
EO
DI
∆pool

Unconstrained
0.847
0.186
0.095
0.300
—

ExpGrad (DP)
0.828
0.018
0.280
0.895
−20.5%
GridSearch (DP)
0.827
0.015
0.304
0.986
−22.1%
Adversarial deb.
0.826
0.020
0.250
0.889
−14.8%
Prejudice remover
0.837
0.065
0.188
0.686
−10.2%
ExpGrad (EO)
0.836
0.107
0.032
0.521
−7.9%

IV. PARITY IS REACHED BY WITHDRAWAL — IN SOME
POPULATIONS

Table II gives the ablation. Every method reaches its target:
demographic parity falls from 0.186 to as little as 0.015 for
under two accuracy points, and this holds on a linear model
and on an adversarial one alike. The mitigation itself works,
which is why we treat it as background rather than as a
contribution.
What changes alongside is the part the metric does not
report: every one of these methods shrinks the pool, by
7.9% to 22.1%, and not one of them closes the gap primarily
by extending decisions to the disadvantaged group. Eighteen of
nineteen survey arms show the same pattern, which suggests
this is a property of the populations rather than of any one
method.

A. Rates understate what is happening to people

The decomposition of [12] splits the closed gap into the
part paid by the advantaged group losing ground and the part


TABLE III
WHO PAYS, UCI ADULT. THE RATE-LEVEL VIEW AND THE PEOPLE-LEVEL
VIEW OF THE SAME INTERVENTION DISAGREE SYSTEMATICALLY.

Method
Share (rates)
Share (people)
Exchange

ExpGrad (DP)
0.575
0.742
2.68
GridSearch (DP)
0.575
0.743
2.69
Adversarial deb.
0.508
0.700
1.96
Prejudice remover
0.498
0.673
2.04
ExpGrad (EO)
0.531
0.660
1.92

gained by the disadvantaged group. Measured in rates, that
split is close to even — 0.50 to 0.58 of the closure comes
from withdrawal (Table III).
Measured in people the split is not even. Between 0.66 and
0.74 of the individuals moved in the two directions that close
the gap — advantaged subjects losing a favourable decision,
plus disadvantaged subjects gaining one — are advantaged
subjects losing one. The denominator is those two flows and
not every changed decision: it excludes the smaller counter-
flows in each group, and a reader who takes it for all churn will
find it inconsistent with the exchange rate, which is counted
over every flow. The reason the two views disagree is that
equal-looking rate changes fall on groups of unequal size,
so the rate-level view — which is what a fairness dashboard
reports — understates the burden counted in individuals, and
it does so in every method tested. The divergence between the
two views is itself predictable from a cross-flow diagnostic, at
r = +0.885 across populations.
The exchange rate shows the same thing without needing
a share: ExpGrad under demographic parity destroys 2.68
favourable decisions for every one it creates.
The normative baseline, stated as the convention it is.
Throughout, “withdrawal”, “who pays” and the exchange rate
are counterfactual-comparative quantities measured against
the unconstrained model’s allocation — a baseline with no
privileged moral standing, since the constraint exists precisely
because that allocation is suspect. On a claims-based view
[28], withdrawing an approval that answered to no legitimate
claim wrongs no one; a positive classification is also not
automatically a benefit (extension in lending can be predatory
inclusion). The exchange rate is therefore an unweighted de-
scriptive count, not a welfare ledger: a reader with prioritarian
weights on the disadvantaged group’s gains may score a rate
above 1.0 as net-good, and the group-conditional flows the
tables report make such weighted readings computable. What
the accounting establishes is narrower and metric-relative: the
certifying number cannot tell these outcomes apart, whatever
one’s weights.
On HMDA mortgage data, however, the direction reverses.
The identical constraint grows the pool by 4.3%, at an ex-
change rate of 0.50 — two favourable decisions created for
every one destroyed. What makes this worth noticing is that
the parity metric cannot see the difference: it reports 0.018 on
the population that destroyed a fifth of its favourable decisions,
and 0.010 on the one that created more than it destroyed.

V. WHAT PREDICTS THE DIRECTION

A. A single-factor design

ACS Income’s label is “earns more than $50,000”, and that
threshold is a benchmark convention rather than a fact about
the world, which makes it a knob we can turn. Moving it
on one fixed state varies the selection rate while the sampled
people, instrument, feature set and group ratio stay fixed —
though moving the label redefines the prediction problem
itself, so this is one arm of the two-routes triangulation below,
not an isolation of the rate on its own. The change in the pool
rises with the baseline selection rate at r = +0.801 over four
arms — too few points for formal inference, and reported as
descriptive; a partial correlation on four points has one degree
of freedom and is omitted as uninformative. The sign flip is
the substantive observation: 22 decisions are destroyed per one
created at a rate of 0.03, compared with 0.75 at 0.89.

B. The transition appears without being manufactured

The same transition also appears where nothing is manipu-
lated at all. Pooling two states across five real loan products,
home improvement at a selection rate of 0.555 levels down
(−1.57%) while refinancing at 0.871 levels up (+2.95%),
with r = +0.803 and Spearman ρ = +0.900. This means
a bank running one constraint across its loan book would take
opportunities away in one product while handing them out in
another, and its fairness report would show success in both.

C. It is the rate, not the difficulty of the task

The design above moves the label. “Earns over $100,000”
is not a rarer version of “earns over $20,000”; it is a harder
problem. That design therefore cannot separate two explana-
tions which predict everything observed so far.
We separate them by holding the task completely fixed
— same rows, features, groups and fitted scores — and
moving only where the model draws its line. The relationship
reproduces, and so does the crossover’s location: on Oregon
the two routes give 0.362–0.653 and 0.353–0.637 (Fig. 5).
Task difficulty is not doing the work.
With twelve points chosen from each population’s viable
band, the relationship holds on the Dutch census (+0.946),
South Carolina (+0.905) and COMPAS (+0.844). Alabama
and Kentucky return negative values on eleven and ten arms;
their viable bands top out at 0.566 and 0.561, at or below every
crossover measured, so both sweeps lie almost entirely on one
side of the transition. We therefore claim the relationship
across the crossover and withdraw any claim that it holds
within the low-rate region alone.

D. Five domains, and the group-gap alternative

Fig. 1 shows every arm, and Table IV the summary. The
table’s job is breadth, and its two halves carry different
weight. The four- and five-arm rows are descriptive, exactly as
Section V-C concedes for Alabama. The dense-sweep columns
carry more, but not as much as a Pearson test would suggest:
twelve thresholds applied to one fitted score vector over one
sample are not twelve independent observations, so we quote


−102

−101

−1000
100

101

COMPAS

cannot reach below the crossover

HMDA MS+LA
HMDA Louisiana
Dutch census 2001

0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00

−102

−101

−1000
100

101

ACS Oregon

0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00

cannot reach above the crossover

ACS S. Carolina

0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00

cannot reach above the crossover

ACS Alabama

0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00

cannot reach above the crossover

ACS Kentucky

Baseline selection rate

Change in favourable decisions (%)

In 6 of 8 populations the change in the pool rises with the selection rate and crosses zero.

The 2 that reverse are marked. Grey = selection rates no deployable classifier can reach on that population, which

cuts some off above the crossover and others below it. Red = the 0.51–0.58 cluster as first published; blue = the 0.22–0.81 span that superseded it.

Fig. 1. Within a population, the change in the pool rises with the baseline selection rate and crosses zero. Eight densely swept populations, every retained
arm; the two that reverse are marked, and both are sweeps whose viable band confines them below the crossover. Panels are deliberately not pooled — no
pooled slope survives its pre-registered bar, so one scatter would assert a common curve the data reject. These eight are 5% of the record and are shown for
shape, not for scale; Figures 2 to 3 carry the population-level evidence.

0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0

baseline selection rate of the deployed model

populations, sorted

located crossovers fall in here
3 of the fifty draws have no computable operating

rate and cannot be placed on this axis

filled: a directional rule applies (37)
open: it does not (10)

classic  (30)

monotone  (7)

inverted  (2)

non-monotone  (8)

Fifty populations drawn at random from a frame fixed in advance: 25 of 47 sit where the rate alone cannot be read

Fig. 2. The scope of the claim, on a sample nobody chose. All fifty populations of the landscape survey — frame, seed and draw committed to version
control before any arm ran — placed at the baseline selection rate of their deployed model and coloured by the verdict the audit returns. 78% admit a
directional rule and 22% do not, and the non-monotone populations are scattered through the range rather than confined to one end, which is why no rate
threshold can screen for them. Note also what the sample does not contain: no population reaches a rate of 0.55, and 25 of the 47 with a computable rate sit
inside the band where located crossovers fall, where reading “often” against “rarely” unaided has nothing to grip.

no p-value on them — such a test describes whether a sweep
is monotone, not whether the rate predicts across populations.
The pre-registered alternative — “this is a property of in-
come prediction and American mortgage lending”, requiring

|r| < 0.30 — is refuted on both new instruments, and refuted
on their densely swept arms rather than their sparse ones:
COMPAS gives +0.844 and the Dutch census +0.946 over
twelve points each. Earlier versions of this paper attached


10−2
10−1
100
101

|change in the pool of favourable decisions| (percentage points, log)

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

baseline selection rate

below the guard

11/18 = 61%

above the guard
21/22 = 95%

rule wrong

rule correct

The rule is not wrong at small effects so much as undefined: below one point it is a coin flip

Fig. 3. Where the rule is undefined rather than wrong. All forty arms of
the two sealed direction cohorts, by the size of the effect they were asked to
call. Almost every miss sits left of the one-point guard: above it the rule is
correct on 21 of 22, below it on 11 of 18, which is a coin flip. The misses
are concentrated rather than scattered, and they are not concentrated at any
particular selection rate — it is the magnitude that governs, not where the
population sits. What this measures is the guard’s existence; its value is a
round number fixed in a protocol, and every floor from 0.25 to 5.00 separates.

0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0

selection rate

ACS md_2018

ACS ar_2019_rac1p

ACS fl_2018

ACS ut_2014_rac1p

ACS tx_2014
ACS nv_2014

ACS ks_2018_rac1p
ACS fl_2018_rac1p

IPUMS mx_2015_t3600_s60k

ACS employment al_2018_rac1p

ACS il_2018_rac1p
ACS tx_2018_rac1p

IPUMS br_2010_race_t600_s60k

ACS va_2018_rac1p

ACS oh_2022_t60000
ACS ma_2018_rac1p

ACS oh_2018

IPUMS br_2000_race_t280_s60k

ACS ny_2014
ACS pa_2018

HMDA sc_2018_race

lawschool_race

the cluster as first published

located crossover

that population's own operating rate

Located crossovers span 0.22 to 0.81, not a cluster --- and Florida 2018 appears twice, at two boundaries

Fig. 4.
Every located crossover, against the cluster we first published.
Each population’s measured crossover (dot) and its own deployed operating
rate (tick). The shaded band is the four-population cluster of the first version
of this work; the measured span is 0.22 to 0.81, so the cluster was an artefact
of which populations had been swept. Florida 2018 appears twice — read by
sex it crosses at 0.284, read by race at 0.439 — so a crossover belongs to
a (population, attribute) pair and there is nothing here to look up instead of
measuring.

TABLE IV
ONE POPULATION PER INSTRUMENT, ON WHATEVER ARMS THAT
POPULATION NATURALLY SUPPLIES. CORRELATIONS ARE BETWEEN THE
BASELINE SELECTION RATE AND THE CHANGE IN THE POOL; n IS THE
NUMBER OF ARMS. NOT POOLED ACROSS INSTRUMENTS, FOR THE
REASON FIG. 1 IS NOT POOLED.

natural arms
dense sweep

Instrument
Domain
Population
r
n
r
n

ACS Income
income
Alabama
+0.801
4
—
—
ACS Income
income
S. Carolina
—
— +0.905
12
HMDA
mortgages
MS+LA pooled
+0.858
4
—
—
COMPAS
crim. justice race arm
+0.870
5
+0.844
12
Dutch census occupation
sex arm
+0.915
6
+0.946
12
LSAC
legal educ.
—
unsweepable —
—
—

p < 0.001 to those coefficients; we withdraw it. Twelve
thresholds on one fitted score vector over one sample are near-
deterministic transformations of each other, so the Pearson null
is the wrong reference and the effective sample size for a claim
about populations is one. The population-level statistic this
design supports is much weaker: across the six densely swept

TABLE V
WHAT EACH MANIPULATION PRESERVES

Manipulation
Direction
Magnitude

Route to the rate
unchanged
differs 3×
Tolerance, 25× range
unchanged
differs 4×
Boosted trees (5/5 pops.)
unchanged
differs 3×
Attribute, sex → race
unchanged
—
Criterion → equalized odds
weaker, unevenly
differs 8×
Optimiser → post-proc.
vanishes
—

populations the within-population slope is positive in four and
negative in two, a sign test at p = 0.34. We report it because
it is the honest number, and note that the two negatives are the
sweeps Section V-C withdraws for sitting entirely below their
crossover — which is a stated exclusion, not a rescue, and
either way the prospective evidence for this paper lives in the
sealed forecasts and not in these coefficients. The four- and
five-arm rows are reported for breadth and carry no inferential
weight on their own.
The oldest competing account is that the gap between
groups drives the direction. The Dutch census has a gap of
0.298, roughly twice Adult’s, making it the population where
that explanation should win. It gives r = +0.915 across all
six arms, none excluded.
Because the parity-gap floor was tuned in-sample (Sec-
tion III), the natural-arm column of Table IV was re-scored
at floors 0.02/0.05/0.08/0.10: each of those correlations stays
between +0.80 and +0.92 with no sign change at any floor
(HMDA is floor-invariant outright; Alabama thins to two arms
only at 0.10). The dense-sweep column is a different matter,
and an earlier version of this paper claimed otherwise.
Table VIII’s 0.05 column is that dense-sweep column, and one
of its three entries is strongly floor-dependent: South Carolina
reads +0.905 at the committed floor and +0.012 at 0.02
and 0.01. So the floor is doing real work on a number this
paper leans on, and the correct statement is the narrower one
— the natural-arm evidence is floor-robust, the dense-sweep
evidence is not uniformly so, and South Carolina’s twelve-
point correlation should be read as conditional on the exclusion
rule rather than as independent of it.

E. Robustness

Table V summarises. Within a population, and in the
attribute-blind regime, the selection rate predicts which
way and orders how much. Neither transfers between
populations: the signed distance from a population’s own
crossover gives ρ of +0.96, +0.95 and +0.78 in three of
four populations, but a pooled slope reaches only r = +0.487
against a pre-registered +0.70 bar.

VI. A CONSTRAINT ON ONE ATTRIBUTE LEAVES
SUBGROUPS BEHIND

A constraint is imposed on the attribute someone chose to
name. Table VI is the gerrymandering failure of Kearns et al.
[15] measured on Adult.


0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8

Baseline selection rate

−100

0

Change in

favourable decisions (%)

Oregon, measured two ways

moving the income cutoff  (changes the label, and the task)
moving the decision threshold  (changes neither)

Fig. 5. The design that separates the selection rate from the difficulty of the task. Moving the income cutoff changes the label, and therefore how hard the
problem is; moving the decision threshold changes neither, only where the fitted model draws its line. Both routes cross zero inside the same band. If difficulty
were doing the work, the second curve would not reproduce the first.

TABLE VI
UCI ADULT. CONSTRAINING SEX TO 0.020 LEAVES THE WORST
Sex×Race SUBGROUP GAP AT 0.178 — NINE TIMES LARGER — AND
MOVES WHICH SUBGROUP IS WORST OFF.

Arm
Sex
Subgroup
Worst off

Unconstrained
0.190
0.315
F×Black
Constrained on sex
0.020
0.178
M×Black
Constrained on both
0.016
0.048
F×White

Constraining sex drives its gap from 0.190 to 0.020 —
a success by the certifying metric. The worst Sex×Race
subgroup gap falls only from 0.315 to 0.178, which is nine
times the gap that was constrained. The subgroup carrying the
residual also changes, from Female × Black to Male × Black,
so an auditor tracking the originally worst-off cell would see
improvement while a different cell absorbed the cost.
This replicates across populations and is more severe than
Adult suggests: 13.2× in Mississippi. It is bounded, however,
by how large the minority is — the effect scales with minority
share at r = −0.671, and does not appear at all below a
threshold. We present this as an empirical replication of [15]
and [13] with a boundary attached, not as a new observation.
A measurement hazard worth naming. Roughly five
subgroups per population are too small to support any estimate.
A rate with an empty denominator must return undefined rather
than zero, or an unmeasurable subgroup masquerades as a
perfectly fair one — which is the failure this analysis is most
likely to produce and hardest to notice.

VII. THE REGIME BOUNDARY

The relationship stops where the optimizer family changes,
not where the protected attribute becomes readable, and a

sealed test with both readings’ bars committed in advance is
what separates those. Under group-threshold post-processing
[5], at each population’s natural operating point, the rate
carries no information about the pool’s direction (r = −0.024,
against +0.585 for the reduction on the same populations);
our pre-registered prediction that the rule would carry over is
a recorded failure. The missing cell decides between the two
available explanations: given the attribute under the same in-
processing optimizer, the relationship survives at r = +0.672
across thirteen natural arms — the method reading, not the
blindness reading. Two cautions we would rather state than
have computed for us: at thirteen arms the interval on that
coefficient is wide enough to touch the competing reading’s
region, and its difference from +0.585 is not itself a difference.
Neither coefficient carries much on its own; what the regime
result rests on is the positive cell, and on the reduction
retaining the relationship where the post-processor does not.
The theory’s group-level claim is untouched. Where
the attribute is readable the advantaged group loses and the
disadvantaged gains, without exception across our attribute-
aware arms. That is a consistency check against a published
theorem rather than a forecast — the theorem made the
prior close to one — and it separates cleanly from the pool
question: the theorem fixes each group’s direction wherever
the attribute is readable, while the pool’s direction, the sum it
does not constrain, stays rate-predictable under in-processing
in both regimes and unpredictable only under post-processing.
A percentile-relaxed form of the theory’s ordering agrees with
the measured direction on 24 of 26 arms and tracks our
predictor at r = +0.935, so the selection rate is a cheap
proxy for a quantity the theory states expensively; the exact
conditions were certified on none of the 26 by our plug-in


estimator, whose ratio diverges in the ˆν tail, and we tried no
other.

VIII. THE AUDIT: GIVE, TAKE, OR REFUSE

Algorithm 1 states the procedure. It has three outcomes
rather than two, and the third is a third of what it does: the
constraint will give, it will take, or the population admits no
answer and the audit says so.
Four ways to refuse, and each answers something.

UNSWEEPABLE (lines 6–8) fires before any constraint is fitted.
On a task generous enough that the trivial predictor is already
close to the model’s accuracy, no deployable classifier can
be moved far enough to cross anything: LSAC refuses at an
accuracy floor of 0.890 against a viable band of 0.056, and the
test is arithmetic on the baseline. VOID (line 16) means the
pool change spans under two points across the entire viable
band — median 1.47 — which tells a deployer the direction
question is moot on their system, not that it is unanswerable,
and is arguably the most useful verdict here. NON-MONOTONE
(lines 20–22) exists because bracketing assumes one rising
sign change and that assumption is population-dependent:
among the ten largest states swept, three are U-shaped, and a
bracket step assuming monotonicity would return a confident
wrong direction precisely there. And INDETERMINATE (lines
28–29) refuses when the deployed rate sits inside the located
bracket or the nearest arms’ effects are within seed noise — the
two conditions under which this project’s own record shows
a sign call has nothing to grip.
Two cautions the earlier version kept in prose are now steps.
Arms below a rate of 0.10 are marked advisory and excluded
from the shape call (line 14), because below that boundary the
two routes to a rate diverge and the accuracy guard does not
catch it. And every fitted arm is probed for the flat keep-
probability signature (line 19), because a lottery under the
certificate is a finding the direction verdict alone would hide:
flag an arm whose mean granted probability just below the
boundary is under 0.10 while the keep-probability’s correlation
with the score above it is ≈ 0, a separation the data makes
wide (0.00–0.07 against 0.17–0.43).
The magnitude guard: existence measured, value oper-
ational. Line 28’s refusal rests on the claim that a near-zero
effect has no sign to predict, and two sealed cohorts put a
number on it: across forty arms the rule is correct on 21 of 22
above one point and 11 of 18 below — 95% against 61%, a
coin flip — and clustering on the sample rather than the arm
leaves the split intact. That measures the floor’s existence. It
does not locate it: sweeping the guard over the same arms,
every value from 0.25 to 5.00 points separates by between
13 and 35 percentage points, with the largest separation at
0.25 and the committed 1.0 giving +34. The guard’s value is
a round number fixed in a protocol before its arms existed,
which the data neither singles out nor contradicts.
What it returns, and what it does not. A sign, never
a size: distance from the crossover orders the effect within
a population, so a team can rank its own segments, but no
slope transfers between populations. The audit also applies

Algorithm 1 Directional audit: decide whether the predictor
applies at all; if it does, locate the crossover and decide
whether to add a floor
Require: deployed model h, held-out (X, y, a) of the vintage
to be deployed on, fairness constraint C
Ensure: predicted direction, and whether a selection-rate floor
is needed
1: if C does not constrain selection rates then
2:
return
OUT OF SCOPE {e.g. equalized odds}
3: end if

4: π ← max(¯y, 1 − ¯y) {trivial-predictor accuracy}
5: s ← h(X)
6: V ← {τ : acc(s > τ) ≥ π ∧ 0.05 ≤ (s > τ) ≤ 0.95}
7: if span(V) < 0.40 then
8:
return
UNSWEEPABLE;
compare
natural
sub-
populations

9: end if
10: T ← 12 thresholds from V, spread evenly in selection rate
11: for all τ ∈ T do
12:
rτ ← (s > τ); fit C on the arm thresholded at τ
13:
∆τ ← % change in favourable decisions
14:
discard τ if parity gap < 0.05 or acc < π; mark τ
advisory if rτ < 0.10 {route-divergence region}
15: end for
16: if fewer than 4 non-advisory arms remain, or max ∆ −
min ∆ < 2 points then
17:
return
VOID {nothing moved; not a refutation}
18: end if

19: probe each fitted arm’s mixture for a flat keep-probability
(Sec. IX-E); flag any flat arm
20: if sign(∆τ) changes more than once across the non-
advisory arms, or changes from + to − as rτ rises then
21:
return
NON-MONOTONE {the rule does not apply
here}

22: end if
23: if every non-advisory ∆τ shares one sign then
24:
return
that sign’s verdict {it holds across the whole
viable band}
25: end if

26: c ←
�
max{rτ :∆τ < 0}, min{rτ :∆τ > 0}
�

27: r0 ← selection rate of the deployed model
28: if min c < r0 < max c, or |∆| at the arms nearest r0 is
within seed noise then
29:
return
INDETERMINATE {the sealed record’s misses
live here}

30: end if
31: if r0 ≤ min c then
32:
return
WITHDRAWAL; add a selection-rate floor
33: else
34:
return
EXTENSION; the floor buys little

35: end if

only where the pool can change size — where the allocation
is capacity-pinned, a fixed number of seats or beds or slots,
the total is constant by construction and the audit is out of


scope from line 0, which is the fixed-resource regime of [17].
No natural operating point below 0.13 appears in this record,
so deployed rates beneath it carry an untested-region caution
on top of any verdict.
What it needs and what it costs. A held-out sample
carrying the protected attribute: audit-time access, which is
legally and practically distinct from decision-time use and
is the regime bias-testing provisions contemplate. It fits the
constraint 12× seeds times; with five seeds and linear learners,
one fit takes 2–10 seconds at 15k–69k training rows, so a full
audit is minutes per population, scaling linearly in the base
learner’s own fit time since each reduction call is a sequence
of learner refits. On a production gradient-boosted model over
millions of rows that multiplier is the binding cost, and we
have not measured it there.
What the sweep buys that one fit does not. A team able
to run 12× seeds constrained fits could instead run one, at
the operating point it already uses, and read the pool change
off it — so what has prediction bought over measurement? A
single fit returns a point; the sweep returns a neighbourhood.
Across 644 adjacent arm pairs whose effects both clear the
1.0-point guard, 70 — 11% — disagree on the sign, so the
direction one fit reports is not reliably a property of the
population rather than of the threshold that fit used. And
populations sit close to their own boundary: of 22 disjoint
person samples carrying both a located crossover and a natural
arm, 12 sit within 0.10 of the crossover and 7 within 0.05,
Texas manufactured-housing at 0.003 and Florida 2018 at
0.004 the nearest. For those teams the direction is not a fact
to accept but a threshold they control, and one fit reports
the withdrawal without reporting the lever. That the crossover
cannot be looked up rather than measured shows in the same
set: Florida enters twice, once per attribute, at 0.284 by sex
and 0.439 by race.
The limit belongs with the answer. The sweep does not
buy a better estimate of what the constraint does at today’s
threshold — repeated fits at one point buy that. It buys shape.
Five of the 21 sit more than 0.20 from their crossover and
would have decided the same from one fit; that 24% over-
states the waste, because every sample in the set has already
passed the monotonicity screen and the 22% admitting no rule
never enter it. A team cannot learn which group it is in without
running the sweep, which is the reply: the audit is not circular,
because its output is not the quantity a single fit measures.
Two rates, and they are not the same rate. The survey’s
78% and the audit’s 63 of 104 are different measurements
and a reader is entitled to be confused by them meeting on
one page. The 78% applies one gate — monotonicity — to
fifty populations drawn at random, and answers how often a
population is shaped so that a directional rule could apply. The
63 of 104 applies every gate the algorithm states to the stored
sweeps, which are a convenience set rather than a random
draw, and answers how often the procedure returns a direction.
The second is what a deploying team should plan against; the
first bounds the claim.
The frame, since “at random” means nothing without

one. Every combination of the fifty US states, the 2014, 2018
and 2019 ACS vintages and the two protected attributes, with
the income cutoff held at $50,000 — 300 population-label
pairs, from which fifty were drawn under a fixed seed. 2022 is
excluded, for the diagnosed reason of Section XI. The frame,
the seed, the draw and the exclusion were all committed to
version control before any arm ran. Fifty draws resolve to 48
disjoint person samples, because two state-years were drawn
under both attributes — the same people read twice.
The result: 78% admit a directional rule and 22%
do not, of which 64% are classic single-crossing landscapes.
Resampling populations rather than draws puts the directional
share at 66–89%, and leaving each population out in turn
never moves it below 77%. Run over the 104 stored sweeps
that resolve to a dataset spec, the audit returns 63 directional
verdicts, 14 NON-MONOTONE, 15 VOID, eleven refused at the
noise floor and one bracket with no natural arm — so it gives a
direction a little over six times in ten, tells a team the question
is moot or the rule inapplicable in most of the remainder, and
is silent on twelve of 104. Every one of the 63 matches what
the fitted constraint did at that population’s natural operating
point, which is a consistency check on the audit’s reading of
its own sweep rather than independent validation, since the
natural arm is part of the curve being read.
The direction survives the extraction a deployer must
apply. Every direction result here is measured on the ran-
domized mixture, but a lender under adverse-action duties
deploys a deterministic model. Thresholding the mixture’s per-
person probability at 0.5 on the natural arms of ten populations
spanning both directions, the extracted model agrees with
the mixture’s pool direction on 10 of 10, with extracted
gaps of 0.009–0.034 against baseline gaps of 0.08–0.19. The
caveat composes with the lottery: these are natural arms where
the mixture is graded, and a flat-lottery arm has no score-
respecting extraction — derandomising it undoes the parity it
bought.
Guard provenance. A guard’s provenance belongs to the
pair it forms with a result, not to the guard. The band span, the
parity-gap floor and the threshold grid are exploratory, fixed
in the threshold sweep’s own pre-registration and confirmatory
for every seal after it. Three are not, and the complete
record states which: a void guard written for a later pre-
registration and imported backwards, moving three arm sets
from refutation to VOID — a change in the conjecture’s favour,
against which the same audit found no arm set that passed
on noise; an advisory boundary descending from a clause that
was sealed, scored 4 of 8 and withdrawn, surviving only where
it can refuse an arm but not manufacture a correct call; and
a noise floor this paper’s own drafting mis-dated, which is
exploratory read from its value and retrospective read from
the constant now carrying it.

IX. BOUNDARIES

A. Where the crossover sits, and what it cost to find out

The crossover was first published as a cluster, on four
populations spanning three instruments, three domains and two


TABLE VII
CROSSOVER LOCATIONS, WITH THE existence OF A CROSSING SEPARATED
FROM ITS location. P(CROSSING) IS THE SHARE OF NESTED
ROWS-BY-SEEDS RESAMPLES IN WHICH A SIGN CHANGE CAN BE
BRACKETED AT ALL; CROSSOVER IS THE MEDIAN LOCATION
CONDITIONAL ON ONE EXISTING. BRACKET-ONLY AND LENDING ROWS
ARE LABELLED WHERE THEY ASSUME RATHER THAN ESTIMATE.

Population
Domain
P(crossing) Crossover Uncertainty
given one

Nested rows-by-seeds bootstrap, 1,000 pairs
COMPAS
crim. justice
100%
0.457
0.433–0.539
S. Carolina
income
97%
0.525
0.454–0.537
Oregon
income
99%
0.532
0.514–0.604
Dutch census
occupation
0%
—
none crosses

Bracket only — crossing assumed, not estimated
Florida
income
—
0.284
0.259–0.309
Ohio
income
—
0.556
0.528–0.585
Pennsylvania
income
—
0.652
0.624–0.681

Lending — one market, three overlapping estimates
HMDA pooled
mortgages
—
0.660
point only
HMDA Louisiana mortgages
—
0.659
point only
HMDA refinance
mortgages
—
0.758
point only

countries. It did not survive measurement. Two things about
Table VII before its numbers are read. Separating whether a
crossing exists from where it sits is not pedantry: read under
seeds alone the Dutch census appeared to cross at 0.576 with
a 95% interval of 0.572–0.580, an apparently precise estimate,
while under the nested bootstrap no resample brackets a
crossing at all — the published figure was a property of the
six arms that produced it. An interval conditioned on an event
that may not occur cannot be read as an interval. And the rates
in that table are not one economic object: survey rows are
predicted-status rates over sampled persons, lending rows are
approval rates conditional on having applied, and COMPAS
inverts a risk score, so a crossover is comparable across them
only as a position within each instrument’s own range.
Located crossovers span 0.22 to 0.81 — 0.22 to 0.65
across the ACS income sweeps, with the law-school and South
Carolina mortgage brackets above 0.80 — so the location
is population-specific and only sometimes near the middle.
Nothing in this work predicts it: the sealed test of the two
candidate predictors returned UNDERPOWERED with three
crossovers located against a floor of six, and three of ten large
states have no crossover to locate at all, sweeping U-shaped
or levelling up throughout. The lending estimates come from
one two-state market read three overlapping ways, so “lending
is different” remains a hypothesis rather than a finding.
That history is the case for measuring rather than trans-
porting, and it is made by the prior’s own failures rather
than against them. Sweeping the arms where a fixed 0.54
fails shows they are populations with no directional rule to
get right — non-monotone or outright inverted, including one
the rule scored correct, whose correctness was therefore luck.
Pooling every arm from all four sealed cohorts against its
own cohort’s crossover gives the calibration that motivates the
INDETERMINATE verdict: the rule is correct on 19 of 19 arms
more than 0.30 from the crossover, 23 of 27 between 0.15
and 0.30, 5 of 6 between 0.05 and 0.15 — and 1 of 6

TABLE VIII
SENSITIVITY TO THE PARITY-GAP EXCLUSION. CORRELATION PER
POPULATION AS THE THRESHOLD IS LOOSENED.

Population
0.01
0.02
0.05
0.10

Dutch census
+0.851
+0.908
+0.946
+0.938
COMPAS
+0.844
+0.844
+0.844
+0.871
S. Carolina
+0.012
+0.012
+0.905
+0.849
Oregon
+0.095
+0.095
+0.664
—
Alabama
−0.368
−0.368
−0.368
+0.296
Kentucky
−0.590
−0.590
−0.654
—

TABLE IX
THE SEALED PREDICTION. POPULATIONS NEVER PREVIOUSLY
MEASURED; PREDICTIONS COMMITTED BEFORE THE RUNS.

Population
Rate
∆pool
Pred.
Actual

MO, $100k
0.026
−16.48%
up
down
AZ, $100k
0.037
−23.34%
up
down
IN, $70k
0.081
−23.32%
up
down
TN, $50k
0.255
−1.68%
down
down
MD, $50k
0.508
+0.78%
down
up
MI, $30k
0.612
+0.85%
up
up
NC, $20k
0.789
+0.16%
up
up
GA, $10k
0.905
+0.30%
up
up

Taiwan 2005
0.885
+0.68%
up
up

within 0.05. The last figure is not significant on six arms, but
a prior read off a dashboard cannot detect any of it, because
detecting it requires the sweep the prior exists to avoid. The
audit refuses all of them; only the prior is exposed.

B. A sealed prediction, and what it cost

The first sealed direction test failed: 4 of 8 against a bar of 7,
not beating a constant (Table IX). What failed is a refinement,
not the rule. Two hours before sealing we added a low-rate
clause drawn from four in-sample populations — internally
consistent, backed by a twenty-seed replication — and it is the
clause that lost: scored on the same eight arms, the unrefined
rule we held before the refinement gives seven of eight, its only
miss being Maryland at 0.508, within 0.032 of the crossover
on an effect of +0.78%. That seven is post-hoc and we do
not claim it; what was sealed scored four. The clause was
route-specific: its own arms reach a low rate by thresholding
one fixed score vector, while the sealed arms reach it with a
genuinely rarer label, and at that rate the two routes disagree
completely — the clause held where it was fitted and failed
on every label-route arm it was sealed against. Nothing in
the in-sample data could have shown that. It is withdrawn,
the unrefined rule was re-sealed on ten fresh populations, and
the low-rate observation survives only in the weaker role of
an exclusion (Section VIII), where it can refuse an arm but
cannot manufacture a correct call.

C. The rule re-sealed, and it holds

The unrefined rule — down below 0.54, up at or above
— was committed with its ten populations and its pass mark
before any of their arms existed: at least 9 of 10 correct and
strictly beating the best constant. It holds: 9 of 10, best


TABLE X
THE RE-SEALED PREDICTION: THE UNREFINED RULE — DOWN BELOW
0.54, UP AT OR ABOVE — COMMITTED BEFORE TEN NEVER-MEASURED
STATES RAN. BAR: 9 OF 10 and BEAT THE BEST CONSTANT.

Population
Rate
∆pool
Pred.
Actual

NE, $100k
0.014
−6.35%
down
down
AR, $50k
0.195
−2.55%
down
down
OK, $50k
0.220
−12.78%
down
down
WA, $70k
0.233
−5.52%
down
down
NV, $50k
0.297
−1.57%
down
down
MN, $30k
0.699
−0.04%
up
down
CO, $30k
0.701
+0.63%
up
up
KS, $20k
0.767
+0.58%
up
up
WI, $20k
0.814
+0.69%
up
up
IA, $10k
0.896
+0.04%
up
up

constant 6 (Table X). The re-seal applies none of this paper’s
tuned guards and scores all ten populations raw, so it has
nowhere to hide an exclusion, which makes it the cleanest
scoring here.
Two statistics, because they answer different questions and
the weaker one is the honest headline. A guesser at the
constant’s rate reaches 9 or more with probability 0.046. But
rule and constant disagree on only five arms, the rule wins four
of those five, and the one-sided sign test on the discordant calls
gives p ≈ 0.19. Nor is this the first sealed attempt at a direction
rule, so the binomial tail carries a sequential correction whose
size is a judgement we should not make in our own favour:
read narrowly it is a factor of two and the tail is near 0.09;
read as this paper’s own abstract counts them — twelve sealed
or registered direction tests — it is a factor of twelve and the
tail is 0.56. Across the conventional line either way, and not
close to it on the wider reading.
One of the nine was luck, and the seed-level accounting
says which. Sixteen of the nineteen sealed arms across both
cohorts are unanimous in sign across their five seeds, and the
three that split are exactly the near-zero effects. Minnesota,
the miss, splits 3 of 5 — and Iowa, at +0.04%, splits
3 of 5 identically and scored correct. Two statistically
indistinguishable arms, one counted for the rule and one
against it, which is what scoring near-zero magnitudes means
and why Algorithm 1 now refuses them as INDETERMINATE.
What the pass cannot establish, stated where the score is.
Every arm reaches its rate by the income-cutoff route, and the
achieved rates leave the interior of (0.30, 0.70) unsampled —
the nearest sit at 0.297, 0.699 and 0.701. So the pass cannot
separate the selection rate from label rarity as the operative
variable, nor the value 0.54 from any prior in that interval: a
rule reading only the income cutoff scores identically here.
The screen-gated race cohort was registered to break exactly
this confound and did, on mixed-route arms off-instrument
and off-continent, where the cutoff-only null scored 5 of
10 against the rate rules’ 8–9. Ten arms from two person-
samples is not ten independent tests: the confound breaks
within populations rather than across them, two clusters admit
no usable bootstrap, and leaving either population out drops
the rate rule from 8 of 10 to 60%. The result is real and its

effects are large — to −47% — and its replication rests on
two person-samples and should be read that way. Its sealed S1
nonetheless fails by its own letter, because a 0.50 prior edged
the 0.54 prior 9 to 8: the rate carries the prediction and the
specific value does not.
The paired statistic has a ceiling this design cannot raise.
A third cohort was built to supply the discordant arms the sign
test needs, and its pre-committed magnitude guard removed
ten of twenty-four — removing them near the crossover,
because effect size grows with distance from it (r = +0.648).
Four discordant arms survived, the rule won all four, and four
of four is p = 0.0625: the bar was arithmetically unreachable.
The guard and the discordance a paired test needs are anti-
correlated by construction, so the weakness does not yield
to a larger balanced cohort. On a second, post-hoc cohort of
larger states the fixed prior scored 5 of 10, every miss agreeing
with that state’s own measured crossover — and on a third,
sealed on real mortgage approvals where the rule could at last
be tested below a crossover, 5 of 10 again (Section XI). Three
cohorts, one pass, which is the case for measuring rather than
transporting, made by the prior’s own failures.

D. Small populations

Below roughly 2,500 test subjects the method’s own ran-
domness exceeds the entire effect of the constraint. This is
a specific instance of predictive multiplicity [21], [25] —
and Long et al. [21] show fairness interventions themselves
exacerbate it — models with equivalent aggregate performance
disagreeing substantially on individuals — and we position
it as a caution supported by that literature rather than as a
novel finding. COMPAS has 1,584 and flips sign between
seeds on two of four arms; LSAC has 6,240 and flips on none.
COMPAS carries direction here and never magnitude.

E. How the withdrawal is implemented: a lottery

At severely cut operating points the fitted mixture stops
being a graded adjustment and becomes a lottery: nobody
below the threshold receives any probability, and every pre-
dicted positive of both groups is kept at one flat rate —
0.65 on the Dutch census arm, 0.135 on COMPAS — with
keep probability uncorrelated with the person’s own score.
The gap closes by random discard and the certificate is
unchanged. The charge here is deliberately narrower than “a
lottery occurred”: randomness has been advocated as a fairness
device [24], the optimal aware classifier is itself randomized
[22], derandomization is a studied problem [23], and on a
claims-based view a lottery among relevantly equal claims can
be what fairness requires [29]. The charge is that a lottery
occurred unannounced, under a certificate indistinguishable
from an informed adjustment, in a setting where individualized
reasons are owed. It is a checkable hazard rather than a
cost of parity: a control at each population’s natural operating
point finds every mixture graded, so the signature belongs
to constraints pushed to extremes and not to withdrawal as
such — which is why Algorithm 1 probes for it (line 19) and


why the full treatment, including the search of a richer two-
threshold class that returns an empty feasible set, is reported
separately.

X. METHOD, AND WHAT WE GOT WRONG

Table XI is the complete ledger — every registered or
sealed test, with its committed bar and its outcome, failures
included and uncorrected. Counted once and consistently it
holds twenty-two rows: fifteen fail, three record a hold (one
alongside a failed first stage), two returned underpowered, and
one settled a reading rather than a pass or a fail. Of the twelve
that test a direction rule on populations it had not seen, one
passed. The rows should not be read as twenty-two attempts at
one claim of which three succeeded: each targeted a different
claim, each failure removed a stronger claim than the one that
survives, and the last column records what each row settled.
The failures are boundary measurements; the passes are tests
of the claim as those boundaries define it.
Three episodes are worth stating in the body because each
cost a claim the paper would otherwise still be making. The
rule does not survive equalized odds (r = +0.334 against a
+0.70 bar), which is why the claim reads parity and not group
fairness: parity controls approval rates directly and equalized
odds does not. Our attempt to derive the rule was beaten
by a constant, which is why the paper is empirical and says
predicts rather than causes. And a refinement drawn from four
in-sample populations, internally consistent and backed by a
twenty-seed replication, was sealed, scored 4 of 8, and made
the prediction worse than the unrefined rule it replaced —
nothing in the in-sample data could have shown that, which
is the whole argument for sealing.
Two published results of our own are withdrawn here rather
than quietly corrected, and they failed for different reasons.
Correlations previously reported at +0.979 and +0.968 are
void because the operating-point design varies the rate by
degrading the classifier and nothing bounded how far: ex-
cluding arms beaten by the trivial predictor leaves Alabama
with two arms and LSAC with one. That same exclusion
rescued mortgage lending, which had failed outright — one
rule moving two results in opposite directions, which is why
its provenance is stated in Section III. Separately, a post-
processing comparison that appeared to show a clean reversal
was arithmetic: the method re-derives its own thresholds and
returned an identical model at all six operating points, so the
effect was a constant divided by a shrinking baseline, and what
exposed it was an exchange rate of exactly 0.000. A published
crossover was also downgraded by a bootstrap we chose to run
against our own result.

XI. LIMITATIONS

The lending evidence is thinner than its market count
suggests. Forty markets carry a rate-bearing arm on each
attribute, but every one of the twenty-six sex arms falls below
the audit’s own disparity floor — median baseline gap 0.013
against the race arms’ 0.079 — so the allocation result rests en-
tirely on race arms. That is a property of US mortgage approval

TABLE XI
THE EIGHT REGISTERED TESTS THAT IMPOSE A SCOPE CONDITION ON
THE SURVIVING CLAIM. THE LEDGER RUNS TO TWENTY-TWO ROWS —
FIFTEEN FAIL, THREE HOLD, TWO UNDERPOWERED, ONE A READING
RATHER THAN A VERDICT — AND THE COMPLETE RECORD CARRIES ALL
OF THEM WITH THEIR REGISTRATION AND SCORING COMMITS. NOTHING
IS WITHDRAWN HERE; TEN ROWS ARE ELSEWHERE.

Test
Bar / outcome
What it settled

EO transfer
r
≥
+0.70;
+0.334 — fail
the rule works for parity, which con-
trols approval rates directly; it failed
for equalized odds, which does not
Post-processing
trans-
fer
carry
over;
r = −0.024
— fail

the rule stops where the model may
read the protected attribute — the
boundary of Sec. VII
Derivation
beat a constant;
beaten — fail
our own attempt to derive the rule
lost to a constant; the first-order
account we could not extend to the
blind randomized case is named in
Sec. II
Sealed rule, refined
7 of 8; got 4 —
fail
the extra clause added from early
data was wrong, and is withdrawn
Re-seal, unrefined rule
9 of 10 + beat
constant; got 9,
constant 6 —
holds

the simple rule predicts populations
it has never seen, from the rate alone

Sealed
magnitude
model
beat
predict-
zero;
MAE
4.50 v. 0.77 —
fail

size cannot be predicted from dis-
tance and band span; the direction-
only concession is earned

Regime deconfounding
two
sealed
readings;
R1
18/18,
r = +0.672
—
method
reading

the pool boundary is the optimizer
family, not blindness; the theorem’s
group directions hold in every aware
cell (Sec. VII)

Race
cohort
(screen-
gated)
S1:
8/10,
but
0.5-null
9
—
fail;
S2
—
holds

the cutoff null is beaten 8–9 vs 5:
it is the rate, not label rarity; the
0.54 value holds no in-band privi-
lege; within-population passes off-
instrument at ρ ≥ 0.9
Sealed
allocation
co-
hort
12/16 + beat 3
nulls; rule 7/8,
constant 7/8 —
fail

HMDA
2021
at
purpose
level,
sealed to reach below the crossover:
0 of 8 arms sit below it, so a
constant ties the rule. Third demon-
stration that US mortgage approval
cannot test the rule; the rate does
beat the purpose-only null 7–6
Dwelling cohort (7.1b)
6/8 + beat 3
nulls; rule 5/8,
constant 6/8 —
fail

the transported 0.660 is badly placed
for manufactured housing: on ten
such arms the pool change is mono-
tone in the rate with one sign
change, bracketing a crossover at
0.39–0.42. The prior scores 5 of 10
there and a crossover measured on
the same arms 10 of 10 — post-
hoc, and not claimed. First real-
allocation arms below any crossover
Located crossover (7.2)
beat
transported
+ constant; 1/3
v. 3/3 — fail

0.405, located on ten manufactured
markets, loses to the transported
0.660 on the three fresh markets that
separate them — and both misses sit
inside 0.405’s own dead band. Over
all sixteen arms 0.405 calls 13 and
0.660 calls 9, but that is post-hoc
TX
manufactured
sweep (7.2b)
audit
verdict,
not a seal
Algorithm 1 run on a within-market
operating-point
sweep
—
Texas
2021 manufactured housing — re-
turns
WITHDRAWAL: signs − −
− − +, one crossing bracketed
at 0.448–0.495, natural arm agrees.
First lending sweep the audit ac-
cepts; the sweep is not uniformly
unreliable here

rather than a gap in the method, and the audit refuses those
arms correctly. Nor does either lending count discriminate:
every arm sits at a rate of 0.82 or above, so the rule predicts


extension on all of them and a constant scores identically.
US mortgage approval supplies no market whose rate
straddles a crossover, and that is now established three
ways rather than inferred once. The state-level arms sit
at 0.82 and above; the fifty-market coverage sits at 0.82 and
above; and a sealed cohort built specifically to reach lower —
a reporting year this work had never touched, split by loan
purpose because purpose is what moves the approval rate —
returned 0 of 8 arms below the crossover and failed for
exactly that reason, the rule scoring 7 of 8 against a constant’s
7 of 8 (Section X).
On real approvals the audit’s sweep has now run
once to a clean verdict, and it is the one that holds.
Manufactured housing is the single mortgage slice reaching
below a crossover. Sweeping the operating point within one
market — Texas 2021, the largest such market — the pool
change crosses zero exactly once, signs − − − − + over
selection rates 0.021 to 0.495, bracketing the crossover at
0.448–0.495; the natural rate 0.448 sits just below it and the
audit returns WITHDRAWAL, which the natural arm confirms.
This is the first within-population sweep this work has run to
a directional verdict on decisions actually made about people,
and it is the object the central claim is about — not the cross-
population comparison of the failed cohorts above. Two limits
keep it honest: the natural direction was known before the
sweep ran, so the agreement is a consistency check and not
a forecast; and it is one market, so it shows the sweep is not
uniformly unreliable on lending rather than that it is reliable
there. On real approvals the rule and “always extend” are the
same rule. Testing the direction claim on allocations needs a
register whose accept rates reach below roughly 0.66, which is
a statement about what is publicly available rather than about
the rule.
The one place the rule could finally be tested on real
approvals, and what happened there. Every lending test
above failed for the same non-reason: US mortgage approval
sits above the crossover, so the rule predicts extension every-
where and cannot be told apart from a constant. One slice of
the register reaches lower — manufactured housing, approved
at 0.505 against site-built’s 0.850 — and a cohort pairing
both slices in each of seven markets was sealed on it, with
a void condition committed in advance for the case where the
rate rule and a dwelling-only null never separate. The sealed
test fails: the rule transported at 0.660 scores 5 of 8 against
a constant’s 6 of 8, though it does beat the dwelling null.
On ten such arms the signs sorted; on sixteen they do
not, and the difference is the whole lesson. The first ten
manufactured arms ran monotone with a single sign change,
bracketing a crossover near 0.405, and we reported that as
the phenomenon holding. Six further markets, sealed against
that located value, give five sign changes and the located
rule loses to the transported one on the arms that separate
them. We withdraw the monotonicity reading: this paper’s
monotonicity claim is within a population across operating
points, and ten populations compared at their natural rates is
a different object — one this paper elsewhere says does not

transport. What survives is a cross-population correlation that
is now significant where it was not, ρ = +0.747 (p = 0.001,
n = 16), and the fact that no single threshold separates these
markets: the best possible calls 14 of 16, the located 0.405
calls 13, and the paper’s own lending value of 0.660 calls 9
— worse than a constant’s 10. Five sealed attempts on real
approvals have now failed in five different ways, and what
none of them has established is that any transported crossover
predicts direction on allocative decisions.
Magnitude does not transfer between populations, only
within them, and a sealed model of it lost to predicting zero.
The crossover’s location is unexplained and wider than
it looked: located values span 0.22 to 0.81, the sealed test of
the two candidate predictors returned underpowered, and some
populations have no crossover to locate. We cannot say why
the rule works. Our own derivation lost to a constant; the first-
order account we could not extend to the blind randomized
case is named in Section II.
A label is not a task. A fixed nominal outcome definition
is a different task each vintage: a dollar cutoff slides down
an inflated income distribution, and restoring the earlier shape
requires matching the label’s quantile, not its real price —
CPI-anchoring is not enough. Four 2022 populations invert
for this reason, and one 2014 state inverts at a lower cutoff,
so this is a property of nominal labels rather than of a vintage.
Coverage is eight data sources, five countries and two
decades, of which 170 of 179 populations come from two
instruments; the eight sources remain the honest count of
independent instruments. Taiwan, Brazil and Mexico are the
non-Western populations and arrived late enough that most of
the record predates them. The only EU population is the 2001
Dutch census, which by this paper’s own vintage standard
grounds no claim about current EU deployments.

XII. DISCUSSION

What a practitioner can use. Run the audit on your own
data. It will locate your crossover, tell you your system admits
no directional rule, or tell you the question is moot because the
pool barely moves across your whole viable band — and each
of those is an answer. Where it returns a direction and that
direction is withdrawal, a selection-rate floor is the remedy:
not a new method, but a linear moment constraint inside the
reductions framework [1] and a variant of the minimum-rate
constraints of [11]. Table XII is what it buys, measured on the
branch the audit actually sends it to — the 95 natural arms
across 78 populations that clear both of the audit’s gates
and on which the plain constraint withdraws. It costs 0.05
accuracy points on average, moves the median exchange rate
from 1.32 destroyed per created to 0.94, and brings 78 of the
95 below one-for-one, none of which were below it already.
On the median arm it does not merely soften the withdrawal
but reverses it, from −2.78% to +0.97%.
Three things that should be said with those numbers rather
than after them. The count is over arms and the populations
are 78, so the ratio is not 95 independent trials. Sub-1.0 is a
descriptive count of predicted labels and not a welfare verdict,


TABLE XII
WHAT THE SELECTION-RATE FLOOR BUYS, ON THE 95 NATURAL ARMS
OVER 78 POPULATIONS THAT CLEAR THE AUDIT’S NOISE AND PARITY
GATES AND ON WHICH THE PLAIN CONSTRAINT WITHDRAWS. MEDIANS
EXCEPT WHERE STATED; EVERY FIGURE RECOMPUTED FROM STORED
ARMS.

plain
with floor

Exchange rate (destroyed per created)
1.32
0.94
Arms at or below one-for-one
0 of 95
78 of 95
Change in the pool
−2.78%
+0.97%
Accuracy, mean cost of the floor
—
0.05 pts

per Section IV-A — the group-conditional flows are what
a weighted reading would use. And earlier versions of this
paper reported the floor’s benefit as scaling with the damage
at r ≈ −0.99; we withdraw that, because the benefit is the
damage minus the remainder and the two share a term, so
the correlation is arithmetic rather than a finding. Two honest
consequences follow. Because the floor is that cheap, a team
that expects withdrawal and does not want to sweep should
simply apply it; what the audit adds is the ability to tell in
advance whether it is needed, how far the operating point sits
from the sign change, and whether the population admits an
answer at all. And whatever the audit returns, the deployed
system’s pool change and who-pays decomposition should be
measured afterwards and reported beside the parity number
— so that escaping the ex-ante audit buys no escape from the
accounting.
What to report. The parity difference alone certifies both
outcomes this paper distinguishes. A report that adds the
pool change and the group-conditional flows costs nothing
to compute, requires no doctrinal commitment, and is the
difference between a dashboard that can tell those outcomes
apart and one that cannot.
Adversarial inputs. A procedure that can refuse can also
be gamed, in four places we can name: the label definition,
the segmentation the audit is run over, the sweep’s own
parameters, and refusal used as an exit. The countermeasures
are symmetrical — fix the label’s quantile rather than its
nominal value, pre-register the segmentation, freeze the sweep
grid, and pair every verdict including a refusal with the ex-
post accounting above. One concrete instance is worth stating:
on HMDA a single constraint earns “extension” on the pooled
book while concentrating withdrawal in home improvement,
so a segmentation chosen after the fact can hide the thing the
audit exists to surface.

APPENDIX: TWO WORKED TRACES OF ALGORITHM 1

Oregon 2018, sex, to a verdict. Demographic parity con-
strains selection rates: in scope (line 1). Trivial-predictor accu-
racy π = 0.636 (line 4); the viable band clears the 0.40 span
bar, so the sweep proceeds (lines 6–9). The stored sweep holds
18 arms; the guards discard 2 on the parity-gap floor and 2 as
worse than doing nothing, leaving 14 spanning rates 0.111–
0.653, none below the 0.10 advisory boundary (lines 11–15).
Their pool changes span 7.14 points, clearing the void guard

(line 16). The signs, sorted by rate, are -----------+++:
one rising change, so the landscape is monotone-crossing
(lines 20–25) and the bracket is c = (0.528, 0.589) (line 26).
The deployed model’s rate is r0 = 0.353 — below min c,
outside seed noise: verdict WITHDRAWAL, add a floor (line
32). What the constraint in fact does at Oregon’s natural arm:
−3.0% of the pool.
LSAC bar passage, to a refusal. Trivial-predictor accuracy
π = 0.890 — almost everyone passes. The viable band spans
0.056, far under 0.40: verdict UNSWEEPABLE at line 8, before
a single constraint is fitted. Had the guard been ignored, the
stored sweep shows what awaited: five of seven arms fall
below the trivial predictor and the two survivors are too few
to read — VOID. Both endings refuse; neither manufactures a
direction.

REPRODUCIBILITY

Code, stored results and the full document trail are in the
accompanying repository, which holds the per-test registration
and scoring commits, the OpenTimestamps receipts for the
seals that carry them, and the complete twenty-two-row ledger.
Every figure here is re-derived from stored results by a test
suite that fails if a documented number and its experiment
disagree, and counts appearing in more than one place are
derived from one source and checked against each other —
after an audit found three descriptions of the same table. One
limit cannot be repaired retroactively: for ten of the sixteen
seals the ordering rests on git commit timestamps from our
own machine, which an outsider must take on trust. The later
seals carry external anchoring; the earlier ones do not.

REFERENCES

[1] A. Agarwal, A. Beygelzimer, M. Dudík, J. Langford, and H. Wallach,
“A reductions approach to fair classification,” in Proc. ICML, 2018.
[2] B. H. Zhang, B. Lemoine, and M. Mitchell, “Mitigating unwanted biases
with adversarial learning,” in Proc. AAAI/ACM Conf. AI, Ethics, and
Society (AIES), 2018, pp. 335–340.
[3] T. Kamishima, S. Akaho, H. Asoh, and J. Sakuma, “Fairness-aware
classifier with prejudice remover regularizer,” in Machine Learning and
Knowledge Discovery in Databases (ECML PKDD), LNCS 7524, Part
II, 2012, pp. 35–50.
[4] M. Feldman, S. A. Friedler, J. Moeller, C. Scheidegger, and S. Venkata-
subramanian, “Certifying and removing disparate impact,” in Proc. ACM
SIGKDD, 2015, pp. 259–268.
[5] M. Hardt, E. Price, and N. Srebro, “Equality of opportunity in supervised
learning,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29,
2016.
[6] L. Hu and Y. Chen, “Fair classification and social welfare,” in Proc.
ACM Conf. Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAT*), 2020,
pp. 535–545.
[7] L. T. Liu, S. Dean, E. Rolf, M. Simchowitz, and M. Hardt, “Delayed
impact of fair machine learning,” in Proc. ICML, PMLR 80, 2018, pp.
3150–3158.
[8] A. K. Menon and R. C. Williamson, “The cost of fairness in binary clas-
sification,” in Proc. Conf. Fairness, Accountability and Transparency,
PMLR 81, 2018, pp. 107–118.
[9] S. Corbett-Davies, J. D. Gaebler, H. Nilforoshan, R. Shroff, and S. Goel,
“The measure and mismeasure of fairness,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 24,
no. 312, pp. 1–117, 2023.
[10] X. Zeng, E. Dobriban, and G. Cheng, “Bayes-optimal classifiers under
group fairness,” arXiv:2202.09724, 2022.
[11] B. Mittelstadt, S. Wachter, and C. Russell, “The unfairness of fair
machine learning: Levelling down and strict egalitarianism by default,”
Michigan Technology Law Review, vol. 30, no. 1, 2024.


[12] N. Krco, T. Laugel, V. Grari, J.-M. Loubes, and M. Detyniecki, “When
mitigating bias is unfair: Multiplicity and arbitrariness in algorithmic
group fairness,” arXiv:2302.07185, 2023.
[13] G. Maheshwari, A. Bellet, P. Denis, and M. Keller, “Fair without leveling
down: A new intersectional fairness definition,” in Proc. EMNLP, 2023.
[14] Y. Yang, X. Chang, and P.-y. Chen, “Fairness may backfire: When
leveling-down occurs in fair machine learning,” arXiv:2603.06901, 2026.
[15] M. Kearns, S. Neel, A. Roth, and Z. S. Wu, “Preventing fairness
gerrymandering: Auditing and learning for subgroup fairness,” in Proc.
ICML, 2018.
[16] F. Ding, M. Hardt, J. Miller, and L. Schmidt, “Retiring Adult: New
datasets for fair machine learning,” in Proc. NeurIPS, 2021.
[17] S. Goethals, E. Delaney, B. Mittelstadt, and C. Russell, “Resource-
constrained fairness,” arXiv:2406.01290, 2024.
[18] J. Angwin, J. Larson, S. Mattu, and L. Kirchner, “Machine bias,”
ProPublica, 2016.
[19] S. Corbett-Davies, E. Pierson, A. Feller, S. Goel, and A. Huq, “Algo-
rithmic decision making and the cost of fairness,” in Proc. KDD, 2017.
[20] E. Diana, W. Gill, M. Kearns, K. Kenthapadi, and A. Roth, “Minimax
group fairness: Algorithms and experiments,” in Proc. AAAI/ACM AIES,
2021.
[21] C. X. Long, H. Hsu, W. Alghamdi, and F. P. Calmon, “Individual
arbitrariness and group fairness,” in Proc. NeurIPS, 2023.
[22] S. Agarwal and A. Deshpande, “On the power of randomization in fair
classification and representation,” in Proc. FAccT, 2022.
[23] A. Cotter, M. Gupta, and H. Narasimhan, “On making stochastic
classifiers deterministic,” in Proc. NeurIPS, 2019.
[24] N. Grgi´c-Hlaˇca, M. B. Zafar, K. P. Gummadi, and A. Weller, “On
fairness, diversity and randomness in algorithmic decision making,”
arXiv:1706.10208, 2017.
[25] E. Black, M. Raghavan, and S. Barocas, “Model multiplicity: Opportu-
nities, concerns, and solutions,” in Proc. FAccT, 2022.
[26] S. Barocas and A. D. Selbst, “Big data’s disparate impact,” California
Law Review, vol. 104, no. 3, pp. 671–732, 2016.
[27] Ricci v. DeStefano, 557 U.S. 557 (2009).
[28] J. Broome, “Fairness,” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, vol. 91,
no. 1, pp. 87–102, 1990–91.
[29] P. Stone, The Luck of the Draw: The Role of Lotteries in Decision
Making. Oxford University Press, 2011.


